so
last time we spoke about uh
we covered sets and induction
this time i want to ask a question about
sets
um
which turns out is is
you know actually quite a deep question
i mean i didn't come up with it
myself this question is
at least 150 years old probably
so the question that i want to ask is
if a and b are sets
um
or
let's phrase it this way at least a
little more efficiently
when do
two sets
a and b
have the same size
okay
this is especially interesting if these
two sets are not finite meaning
there's not five of them there's not
eight of them
um but there's
infinitely many members whatever that
means and i'll actually define what that
means for example
do the natural numbers and the integers
have the same size
do the natural numbers and the rational
numbers have the same size
what about the rational numbers and the
real numbers even though we haven't
defined that yet you can still
um keep in mind
you know your notion of the real numbers
from
calculus
and so
this question is why is it deep
because
it depends on this word here
size
and
what exactly that means so
i'm not
so kind of an answer
this is due to george cantor
he said that two sets so not an answer
but a way of defining size a way of
saying the two sets have the same size
he said two sets have the same size when
the
of the two sets
the elements of the two sets
can be paired off
okay meaning
and i will make this much more precise
in
a minute or so
what what
does he mean or what do i mean for
example the set a b and c
and the set one two and three
so this one consi this set consists of
three letters a b and c this set
consists of three integers one two and
three they have the same size because i
can essentially pair them off
uh a
so a and one go together
b and two go together and c and three go
together meaning each one of each member
of this set gets paired off with
an element of this set
and every element of this set gets
paired off with a unique element from
this set
okay
now
to make
and so this is uh
goes under the name of the theory of
cardinality or
cardinal numbers if you like
but we won't go too deeply into it
so the way you make
or the way
one makes this
pairing off business more precise
is using the language of functions
and you've been dealing with functions
since you've been
um
doing calculus so
i'm just gonna quickly um
reintroduce or review some terminology
that goes along with functions that
you know will be the
precise
uh meaning of this pairing off business
that i'm writing here so
but just uh with an eye towards the
future this is why i'm
reviewing some of these
some of this terminology related to
functions so
so brief review of some terminology for
functions so let me just recall that
if a and b are sets
then
function f
a b so a function's usually written as f
colon a arrow to b meaning it takes
elements from a into elements from b
this is
a mapping that
or if you like an assignment
that assigns to each x
in a
a unique element
which we denote f of x
and b okay so one single input x
gives me a single output
um an input does not give me three
outputs now this is what one would call
a naive definition probably not
necessarily completely unambiguous but
for us this suffices in the textbook you
can look up
a function is
unambiguously defined or
as a subset of the cartesian product of
a and b
which you would recognize as essentially
describing the graph of the function but
then you never use that definition of
again
and you essentially use this definition
uh when you think about functions
and when you prove properties of
functions so
this we will just take as our definition
and it will be unambiguous uh
enough for us
so
let f be a function from a to b
if c is a subset of a
we define
a set so this is f of capital c so c is
not an element of a it's a subset of a
this is a
subset of b
this is
let me write it slightly differently
here this is a set of all y and b such
that
there exists an x and c
such that y equals to f of x
and
i could write this a little more
efficiently as this is the set of all
elements f of x
as x
ranges over the
elements of this subset c
and
if d is a subset of b
we define
the sub the set f inverse of d
this is the set of guys that get mapped
into d so
i should say this is the inverse image
of d
not a
the inverse of this function f
okay so you know the inverse
whatever that means for now
um
does not necessarily always exist so
this inverse image of the set d always
exists
this is the set of all elements in a
such that
f of x
is in d
okay
so
for example
let me
uh
so
one two three four
and
a b
c d
and let's suppose
1 goes to a
2 goes to a
3 goes to c
4 goes to d
ok
then
f of the set one two this is where what
is the set that gets
so this is the subset of so this should
be you should think of as b
a b and c uh and d and then one two and
three this is a
so f of
the set of one two so one gets mapped to
a two gets mapped to a so this is just
the set
two
f of
the set uh let's go with one
and three
one gets mapped to a
so this should be
a
one gets mapped to a
and three gets maps gets mapped to c
okay
and so a couple of inverse images
if i look at the inverse image of a
this is equal to the set of all guys
that map to a
this is well one maps to a
and two maps to a so this is one two
now if i look at the inverse image of
a
c
d
what elements get mapped to a c and d
well one and two get mapped to a
three gets mapped to c four gets mapped
to d so everything maps into a c and d
so this is just the original set
or the set a one two three four
okay
all right so
some more terminology
and this is what we will mean by
when two sets can be paired off
or this makes that more precise
let f be a function from a to b
we say that f is
injective
or
i'll write one to one should be
read one to one
if f satisfies the following property
f of x one equals f of x two
implies
x one equals x2
okay
so injective or one to one means if i
take two different
uh inputs i get two different outputs
okay
that's essentially what this means i
mean taking the
equivalent
so equivalently
from a logical standpoint
this statement implying this statement
is equivalent to the negation of this
statement implying the negation of this
statement so equivalently this means x
not equal to x2
implies f of x1
not equal to f of x2 so maybe this is
clear if i were to define f as injective
if it satisfies this property
um maybe that would have been clear that
you know f takes two different
elements to two different elements
but this condition here is typically
easier to verify or at least simpler to
state and verify
so f is surjective
or
onto
if
the image of a
is b
okay
so
let me write that statement out a little
bit more everything in the set b
gets mapped to by something from a
so
so equivalently this says that uh
for all y and b
there exists an x and a
so that
f of x equals y
okay
f is
bijective
if f is
one to one and onto so
it's f is bijective if it's both
injective and surjective
so
for example this map that we just drew
over here that sends 1 to a
2 to b
i mean 2 to a 3 to c 4 to d
this is neither injective nor surjective
it's not injective because it takes two
different elements
to
image in b namely a so it takes one and
two to a
it's not surjective because nothing gets
mapped to the element b
uh
here so
so we've seen that's not subjective of
course this map if i take
again imagine this is one two three
a b c d
this map
here
this function here that takes 1 to a 2
to b 3 to c
this is actually injective but not
surjective
and then of course we could change this
slightly
and
one goes to a two goes to b and
three goes to b
then this is
third objective but not
injective
okay
now
the map that sends
um
let's switch sides here
a b and c
one two three
a to one b to two c to three this is
a bijection
biject div so if i say something's an
injection or surjection or bijection
that just means it's a map that is
injected surjective or bijective
respectively
okay
and now
definition
so this is really there's not much to
this definition but just
defining a couple of
functions that are related to a given
function
if f goes from a to b
g goes from
b to c
the composition g of f
is the function which goes from a to c
is defined
by
g of f
of x equals g
of
f x
if f
is bijective
so this is the composition of two
functions i didn't write the word
composition but this is
g of f means the composition or is
referred to as a composition if f is
bijective
then we define
the inverse function to f
b
to a
by
the following
if y is in b
then
f inverse of y and a
is the
unique
element in a
such that
if i take this element stick it into f i
get back y
okay
so
inverse the inverse of a function only
exists for bijective
functions
or at least is only defined for biject's
bijective functions
you know keep that in mind don't confuse
that with the
inverse image of sets okay
although those two
notations look the same you have an
inverse f to the minus 1
after the minus 1
if it's a function that is the inverse
function however if i'm taking f to the
minus 1 of a set that means the inverse
image of that set as defined over there
okay
so
bijections meaning bijective functions
will be
what we mean when we say two sets can be
paired off
okay
it's what we mean when we
or at least what
cantor's
and to answer to that original question
was
uh
when do two sets have the same size so
this is the notion of cardinality
that i alluded to
so
two sets we say two sets a
and b
have the same
cardinality
if there exists a bijection
or a bijective function
f
from a to b
okay
and
uh
so let me just
make uh some notation here so this is
not really
um
you know new objects i'm defining or
operations this is just some notation so
when two sets have the same cardinality
uh we write
so this is just a shorthand way of
writing that two functions have the same
cardinality you should not
necessarily think this means taking the
absolute value of a set okay that that
doesn't mean anything
all right this is just shorthand
notation for saying two sets have the
same cardinality
if
a has the same cardinality as
the set one two three up to n
we write
a equals n
okay that's just shorthand for saying
that a set has the same cardinality as
the natural numbers up to n
we write a
so if
there exists an injective
function or i will often say either
function or map i did
you know you should take those as uh
synonymous
there exists an inject injective
function f
if there exists an injective function f
from a to b
we write
this thing
again do not read this as taking the
absolute value of some set
and that absolute value is less than or
equal to the absolute value of the other
set because that's meaningless we
haven't
said what that means even
this is just shorthand notation
and
if a
if there exists an injection from a to b
but they don't have the same cardinality
we write
this
okay so even though this notation of
these absolute value things being on the
outside of the set
makes you think absolute value
or shouldn't be interpreted as absolute
value it's okay to kind of think as
you know
a certain ordering being there as one as
sort of a having smaller size than b
okay
we write this because there being a
injection from one set to the other
kind of means i can pair off
elements of a
with some elements of b
okay maybe i don't get all of the
elements of b but i can pair off some of
the elements of a with some of the
elements of b for example that first map
we wrote up there
yeah that says that the set one two
three
uh in size is less than or equal to the
size of abcd because we found an
injection an injective map from the
first set to the second
set
um this third map would say that
uh
the size of the set abc is equal to
three written here
or shorthand written here
okay and in fact
that first map that we wrote up there
again
uh is
so from first map this says that the set
of one two three
uh in our shorthand notation absolute
value has is less than the size of abcd
okay so don't think of
these as saying the absolute value it's
best to maybe think of this as saying
the size of okay
all right so
if there exists an injective injective
map from our function from one set to
another then the size of a is less than
or equal to the size of b
if the size of a is less than or equal
to size of b but the size of a and b are
not the same we write the size of a is
less than the size of b
okay
so best to think of those
um this absolute value looking thing as
being shorthand for r for saying the
words size of
okay
now i'm not going to prove this it goes
a little bit beyond
the
scope of this class but let me just say
that
this uh ordering this inequality
these symbols that we're writing
does
bear some sort of semblance to the
ordering of real numbers in that if i
have two real numbers
one is less than or equal to the other
and vice versa so a is less than or
equal to b and b is less than or equal
to a then a must equal b
that is in fact true also for
this elementary notion of size of sets
and this is
i mean you should it shouldn't surprise
you for
you know finite sets
um
necessarily if if i have
a pairing of a
if a is no bigger than
uh n and n is no bigger than the size of
a then a should have n elements
um but it's
takes a little bit more to prove for
um
sets which are not finite so i forgot to
write this down we also say that a
if
the size of a is equal to the size of
this finite set 1 through n we say a
is finite
okay
so this theorem that i'm stating here is
the
cantor schroeder
bernstein
theorem
which states that
if the size of a
is less than or equal to the size of b
and the size of b
is less than or equal to the size of a
then
size of a equals size of b so
again if you're thinking of these
in the context of
real numbers one being less than or
equal to the other and vice versa
of course that implies that those two
real numbers are equal to each other but
we're not talking about real numbers
again this is just shorthand notation
for saying there exists a bijective map
from a to b
this means there exists a bijective map
from a to this set
this means there exists an injective map
from a into this from a to this set
okay
so this is not a statement about real
numbers this is a statement about
cardinality
all right
okay
so
you know
finite sets are sets that you can count
um if you had in fingers
now
you know
we would like to be able to define what
it means to be able to count a set
so what i mean by count asset meaning if
i had infinite time
i could go
through the set
counting them one two three 4 5 6 7 8 9
10 and so on i don't need to go any more
okay
so
but what does that
process of counting mean that means for
each element of the set that i'm trying
to count i can pair it off
with
a natural number one two three and so on
so this is how we define
uh countable sets
so
if a has the same size as the natural
numbers meaning there exists a bijection
from a to
the natural numbers
then we say a is
countably infinite
if a is finite
or accountably
i also use a lot of shorthand so
but it's not clever shorthand so you
should just be able to sound what
like if you just sound that out you'll
you'll get what word i mean countably uh
accountably infinite infinite
we say a is
countable okay
so
countably infinite means i need all the
natural numbers to be able to count off
uh
the elements of the set a
countable means maybe i stop after some
point and i've counted all them
so a is finite or it's countably
infinite
otherwise if a set is not countable we
say it's uncountable
okay so
let's uh take a look at a couple of
accountable sets that maybe um
don't come off as being
accountable
um
set of
actually that's a homework problem
the set of even integers
is countable
the set of
odd so i said integers a minute ago
maybe i should just say natural numbers
the set of odd natural numbers
is
countable
so
in fact
so this is just a side
so these are two
disjoint subsets that make up
the natural numbers the even and odd
natural numbers
and they both have the same size as the
set that they make up
so it
you know it's
almost like saying the cardinality of
the natural numbers is twice the
cardinality of the natural numbers since
it's
you would think that the size of n
should be the size of this set plus the
size of this set since they're
destroying and they make up the set
um
but you know that that's not how
cardinality works
um
you know you don't just add
cardinalities to get the
cardinalities but
so this is kind of a subtle
kind of interesting thing about
cardinalities
and feynman
so richard feynman who won the nobel
prize in the 60s for his work on qed
described
this as saying um
there are
twice as many numbers
as numbers
um
okay so
let's uh
prove this
so what does this mean that this means
we have to be able to find a
bijective function from this set
to this set
okay or
from this set to this set okay one or
the other um
and
so in fact
um
maybe i should well i'll say something
about uh about that in a minute um
well let me let me pause let me pause
this just for a minute
and let me make a few comments
about cardinality
which maybe i should have
so
this you can think of is a little
theorem
if i have two sets
a has the same size as b
then b has the same size as a
so remember this i mean what i just said
in english
is not exactly what those symbols mean
remember this means there exists a
bijection from a to b this means there
exists a bijection from b to a
so what is the proof of this
statement
so let's start off with the hypothesis
suppose
then
there exists
bijective map
bijection bijective function
f from
a to b
okay
now if i have a bijection from a to b
then what would be a bijection going
from b to a that would just be the
inverse
so this is not the inverse image of sets
like we described but the actual inverse
which we defined over there
is a bijection
so b has the same size as a
okay
um
one other statement so
if a and b have the same size
and b
and c have the same size
so again a b and c are sets i should
have written that at the beginning
but from this context you should
understand that a b and c are sets then
a and c have the same size
okay
so let's do a proof of that
so
let's start with the hypothesis meaning
a has the same size as b and b has the
same size as c
so what do these two statements mean in
terms of the definition that means there
exists bijection from a to b
and a bijection from b to c
and
this statement so
let me finish this and then i'll say
what i was going to say then there
exists bijections f
from a to b
and g
from b to c
okay
[Applause]
so perhaps i should have said a few more
words about why this is true
so but i'm going to leave this as the
exercise
just to kind of pause the lecture and do
it yourself and what i'll write
uh
shortly for this case i'll actually
prove that the thing i'm going to define
is a bijection that should help you
so
let me draw over here off to the side
we have
you know again 1 2 3
a b c
so think of this as f
this is my set a this is my set b
and then i have
alpha beta gamma
and a gets mapped to alpha b gets mapped
to beta c gets mapped to gamma
so what would be the map going from a
down to
the set c
well
perhaps the composition one gets mapped
to a which gets mapped to alpha so one
gets mapped to alpha two gets mapped to
beta
3 gets mapped to gamma how do i build
this function out of the things that i
know namely this f in
g
well this function going from a to c is
just the composition of these two
functions so this is off to the side
this is not a part of the proof
let h go from
a to c
be the function
g of f x
okay so i claim that this function is a
bijection
so we want to prove
okay that it's one to one and onto
all right so let's do uh
one to one first
so
suppose so we this is the part where i'm
going to put this in parentheses meaning
what we're doing now
so
we're going to prove that h is one to
one
so that means we have to verify
uh
the definition that i've erased
so remember the definition so
let's write it all out
we first show
h is one to one and what this means
according to the definition that i'm now
writing over
if h of x1 equals h of x2
then
x1 equals x2
okay so this is what we want to prove
this is the definition of
h being one to one
so
um
so let's start
if h of x1 equals h of x2
then
in terms of how we've defined h
which is g of f of x so the composition
and this means g
of f of x1
equals g of f of x2
okay that's just what h is
now
this
statement here
now g we know is a bijection okay we
know g is one to one
and since g of something equals g of
something else and g is one to one this
implies that f of x one
equals f of x two
this is since
g is one to one
okay
so starting with this and the definition
of h being the composition
we conclude that f of x one has to equal
f of x two because g is one to one
now since f is also one to one right we
are assuming that f and g are bijections
since f is one to one this implies
x one equals x2
since f
is one to one
and this is what we wanted to prove
right we wanted to start with assuming h
of x one equals h of x two and prove x
one equals x two which is what we've
done
so thus
we've proven that h is one to one
okay
now we have to show that it's surjective
that it's onto
hfa equals c
and again i'll write out what this means
this means for all
y and c
or let me call it z
there exists an x in a
such that
h of x
equals z
okay
now we use the fact that f and g were
injective to conclude that the
composition
is injective so
it stands to reason that we're going to
use the fact that they're both
surjective to prove that h is subjective
so we need to prove that for all z and c
there exists an x and a such that h of x
equals z so
let z be in c
now we need to find some x and a that
gets mapped to z
we'll use that
g and f are both surjective
so
and what's the picture that kind of goes
along with this
here's the set c
b and a
we have some element of z
and
we know that since g
is surjective there's some
element in b that gets mapped to z by g
okay
but now since f going from
a to b is surjective there exists some x
which maps to y
okay and then that's the whole argument
that's it
all right i drew this picture but now i
just need to
turn it into english
using
the properties and assumptions that i
have
since g is
surjective
there exists a y and b
such that
g of y equals z
since f is
so objective
there exists an x in a
so that
f of x equals y
but then
if i look at h of x this is equal to g
of f of x which is equal to g of y which
is equal to z
by how we've defined y
remember g of y equals z how we found y
and how we found x remember f of x
equals this y okay
and therefore this map h is on 2
and therefore h is a bijection proving
this theorem
so that should help you
in your mini exercise to to
prove that the inverse of a bijection is
a bijection
okay
so
back to
what we're doing to begin with
we want to show
the set of even natural numbers has the
same
size as the natural numbers has the same
cardinality as the natural numbers and
the same for the odd one so i'm just
going to do the odd ones
again this will be a small exercise for
you to do
to prove number two the statement for
the
uh
odd ones so i'm going to do the even one
and you can do the odd ones
you should if you plan on studying more
math
get used to
the instructor
professor
research paper writer
textbook author
giving out little exercises to make sure
that you're following along and that you
can do
some minor tasks
at some point during
the discussion
okay so
we're going to find
uh
so
we want to show
that the natural numbers has the same
size as the even natural numbers which
is the same as this statement by that
first theorem i wrote up there
um
now
we that means we need to find a
bijection from the natural numbers
to
the set of even natural numbers
um
this should be
not too bad
i mean so again this is uh
off to the side this is not part of the
proof
what would be the map going from
these guys to these guys
well
i mean there's several you could choose
but maybe the simplest is one gets
mapped to two two gets mapped to four
three gets mapped to six four gets
mapped to eight five to ten six to
twelve and so on and so on
okay now what is that map
and now i'll re
uh i'll continue the proof
let f be the function
into the even
natural numbers
defined by
f of n equals
2 times n
and so
we're in a natural number okay so this
is just formally writing the function
that takes one to two two to four three
to six four to eight and so on and so on
um
i claim f is uh bijection so i have to
show that f is one to one and onto
so we first show
f is one to one
so that means that i have to assume f of
n one equals f of n two and conclude
that n one equals m two
so let me actually write out what this
means again for you to say that f is one
to one is one to one i e
if
f of n one equals f of
n two
then
n one equals n2 but this is this is easy
to verify for this function that we've
written down
because
if f of n1 equals f of n2 so remember
this is what we want to show all right
so to show it i start with my
assumption
and i need to conclude n one equals n
two
so
suppose f of n1 equals f of n2 my
assumption my hypothesis i need to
conclude n1 equals n2
then this implies by the definition of f
2 times n1 equals 2 times n2
which by algebra of just eliminating the
2's n1 equals n2 which is the conclusion
that i want
okay so i've proven the statement
that if f of n1 equals f of n2 then n1
equals n2 therefore f is one to one
so
thus f is one to one
so now we wanna show
f is
on to surjective
okay
i'll write this out again ie
for all
elements that are in
that are an even number
there exists an n
such that
f of n equals m
okay
now
let m be an even integer
and so not to confuse this let me write
2 times
k
this is the same set
just using a different dummy variable
instead of n in my description of the
even natural numbers
then
and let's do that here as well
okay
again this is not changing anything this
is just changing the letter i'm using to
describe the set
um which is inconsequential
but i don't want you to get the false
impression that
somehow i'm not doing anything at all
okay so suppose i have an even integer
then there exists
simply by the definition of this set
there exists
an n
natural number
so that
m equals 2 times n
then f
of this natural number which is 2 times
n equals m and therefore
i get something that maps to m
therefore f is onto therefore f is a
bijection
and
the two sets have the same cardinality
okay
all right um
so
let's
where are we at where should i write
it's right here
maybe i'll leave that up because i don't
want to
now using this and i'll probably put
this in the
in the homework i mean
one can um
also
show
i should say using this but
one can also show that
the integers
have the same size as the natural
numbers
um which again is a little bit
surprising since the natural numbers are
a strict subset of z
um
so what's the proof uh so i'm gonna draw
a picture
then i'm gonna write down the function
and then i'm gonna leave it as
uh actually i'm gonna put in the
homework that for you to verify that
this function is one to one and onto
so let's say
there's as many
natural numbers as i want to write
um
and as many integers as i want to write
okay so
what would be a way of
mapping the integers in a one-to-one and
onto fashion
onto the natural numbers
well
what we could do
first off let's send zero to one
just to get zero out of the way
and
from then on now we just need to find a
way to map the positive integers and the
negative integers
onto the natural numbers bigger than 2.
and in some way
you know
mentally we should feel like we can do
this
because we kind of did it over there but
not not explicitly so
um
how about we take one
to two
two to four
three
to six
okay four would then go to eight
and we'll take
one to three
minus two to
five
they're getting crossed
and then
minus three
would get sent to seven so you see that
the positive integers gets mapped to the
even natural numbers
and the negative uh integers
get mapped to
the odd natural numbers bigger than one
okay
so i'm not even going to write the proof
this will be um
part of the homework
now
you know
it is a bit surprising that there are
twice as many numbers as numbers
uh not too surprising since you know
kind of these subsets if you
picture them as i've been doing as
subsets of the
real line you know they're kind of
discreet so you should be able to count
them
um what is not what is more surprising
are
is whether or not you can count subsets
that in some sense are not discrete for
example what about
uh the rational numbers
so
this is a theorem
that and let me just look at those
positive rational numbers in fact i
could take all rational numbers but
for the statement of this theorem
if i look at those rational numbers
with
which are positive
then
this has the same size
as
the natural numbers you can count the
positive rational numbers which is just
you know
a bit uh
a bit crazy to me because
you know here
at least for let's say the integers
once i'm at an integer
i can move to a next biggest one and
count that one in some way right
and
so that kind of makes it believable that
i can count
uh the integers the integers have the
same size as the natural numbers even
though that at first glance it looks
like there's twice as many
um
but for rational numbers you know
between any two rational numbers there's
another rational number in between them
right you just take uh
take the average of those two rational
numbers
so it's not cl so now this idea of
being at a rational number and then sort
of moving to the next big one
that you can't do that now so now it's
it's a little bit
up in the air at least whether or not
you can count the rational numbers
and what i'm saying is
that indeed you can and this will be
part of the homework
i will at least
give you an idea of
how the proof will go what we will
actually be able to write down a map
based on a simple fact
so let me not write down proof but
let me write down
remark
so we'll actually actually be able to
write down a map based on one simple
fact which is this fundamental theorem
of arithmetic which says
that so this is just discussion now you
know
more stuff will be written in the
homework about this but so just try to
follow along
so the fundamental theorem of arithmetic
says that if you have a positive natural
number
you can write it in a unique way as a
product of prime numbers
now for rational numbers
using that
that means you can write every rational
number uniquely
as a product of prime numbers
divided by another product of prime
numbers
where no two prime numbers uh
where the where the prime numbers up top
and the prime numbers at the bottom uh
none are in common meaning you've
uh simplified as much as possible so
instead of
um
you know
15 over 3
no that's not good
let's say 15 over 30
you have one half okay
so
the map that i would take
so what i'm saying here is that every
rational number
can be written as
some
product
so let me not use that notation but some
product p r one
p n r n
q one
s one
q m
s n where
p1 p1 p2 and pn these are all primes q1
up to qm they're all primes r1 or n
these are all exponents positive
natural numbers so
rj
s k these are natural numbers
p 1 p n q 1 to q m are primes
and
for all
j k
qj does not equal
pk so there's no prime that appears both
up here and down here we've already
simplified that away
okay
so then
the map
so
this uh
so just so
you know
you don't think i'm i'm
fooling you
you know nine halves
which is a positive rational number this
is three squared over two
yeah
uh
you know 20 i'm not going to do any more
that's it
you should
so
the map that we will take from this
rational number to
a natural number
will be
this gets mapped to
the natural number p1
to r1
pn
2rn
times now
q one two
two s one minus one
q m
two s n minus one so basically i map it
to the integer
that has this exp has this expansion in
terms of prime numbers
where now the exponents of these prime
numbers is even depending on these
exponents on top and the exponents of
this one
are odd depending on this exponent on
top
okay
so for example 3 squared over 2
this would
get mapped to a
three to the fourth times
two
okay
so what we'll do in the homework is show
that this map is in fact a bijection
so
okay
those two theorems
you will prove in the homework they
won't be too
too bad i will leave enough hints
so
uh dealt with z
dealt with q essentially
i mean so
let me
actually write down this is really a
corollary of
these two theorems here
which i haven't proved but you will
prove in the homework
so
it says that
the rationals are countable all the
rationals not just the positive ones
and
what's the proof
so
we know that
i'm going to give you kind of a sketch
should i sketch it or should i write it
all out i'm running a little bit at a
time
but
so maybe i will just
tell you why this is true
i mean all the details are essentially
here i'm just not going to write it as
carefully as i've been writing down the
proofs before
so
let me write this as
the proof sketch
of course you can write these
you can actually use the definitions and
write this out but this is a the
essential idea so
um
we have that the size of
rational numbers
so let me
um
this has the same size as
the rational numbers
which are negative
okay
and this how do we establish this
or
let me instead of using the same letter
let's say r
since
f of q equals minus q
is a
bijection
from
the first set to the second set
if i just take a rational number
positive one take its minus then i get
an element of the second set and this
is a bijection okay
um okay so
thus
since this has the same size as the
natural numbers
and by that theorem we proved over there
the size of this set is the same as the
natural numbers so
it is countable
okay
then there exists
bijections
f
going from
q so the positive rational numbers
to the natural numbers
and g going from the negative ones
okay so
picture here is
um
well let's not write draw the picture
yet
okay so i have these two bijections from
the positive rationals to the integers
this one from
um
the negative rationals to the
natural numbers
how do i get a map that goes from all of
q
now to the natural numbers well let's go
in between and go to the integers
then i define
a function
h
which goes now from all of q
to
the integers
by
h of x
equals
0 if x equals 0
f of x if x is positive
and negative
g of x
if x is negative
okay
and h is
bijection
so everything up into this point um
has been
completely fine with the exception of me
verifying that this map is a bijection
and this map is a bijection so that's
kind of the only parts that i'm leaving
out for you to verify
then h is a bijection
so
q
has the same
cardinality as integers
which we've shown has the same
cardinality
as the natural numbers
and therefore
rationals have the same cardinality
as the natural numbers so they are
accountably infinite
so
a
natural question is
[Applause]
i mean is there anything bigger than the
natural numbers because everything i've
written down this has the size of the
natural numbers
we haven't really defined
the real numbers well enough yet to
make
any sort of claim
like that about the real numbers
and now is there just any set
that
is bigger in size than the natural
numbers the answer to that
you know was unknown and it's
pretty um
pretty strikingly yes
in fact
so
let me phrase that question
does there exist
you set
a such that
a has strictly bigger cardinality than
the natural numbers so a is uncountable
okay
so to answer this question astoundedly
yes
let me first define for a
general object
if a is a set
we define
script p of a
this is the power set of a
this is a set that consists of all
subsets of a
so this is the
set of all sets b
such that b is a subset
of a
okay
so for example
uh if a is
the empty set
the power set
so a is empty
what
are the subsets of the empty set well
there's only one subset of the empty set
the empty set
so and even though the empty set has no
members its power set has one member
if a equals one
then the power set of a the set of all
subsets consists of the empty set
and
the set itself
one
okay
and let's do one more
if a is the set 1 2
then the power set
of a
this is the set
which consists of the empty set because
this is a subset of the set
the set consisting of one because this
is a subset of this set
or two
one two
now notice something
this set had cardinality uh strictly
speaking
i should have defined that as being
having cardinality zero yet its power
set has cardinality one
a has size one because it's uh in one to
one correspondence with just
one
and its power set has
uh two elements so
um
has cardinality two i could count them
off one two
a has size two has two elements and the
power set of a has size four it has four
different elements that empty set one
two
one two
so what one can prove in general
and which will appear on the homework is
if
a
has the same car has size n so it's a
finite set of size n
meaning it's in one to one
correspondence with the
numbers one up to n
then
its power set is also finite
and has cardinality two to the n
okay
and
you can prove by induction if you like
that two to the n is always bigger than
n
okay
and
so a theorem i'll prove next time
which will finish our discussion of sets
and uh cardinality
um
and then we'll move on to the real
numbers
is this theorem due to cantor
uh which says that not just for
you know finite sets do we have the
power set being in some sense strictly
bigger than the original set but for any
set
so
this theorem due to cantor is if a
is a set
then
the cardinality of a is strictly smaller
than
the cardinality of its power set
so
this definitely answers our question
does there exist a set with cardinality
bigger than the natural numbers
so let me write this as a remark
uh in fact
maybe i'll state this as another theorem
which just follows immediately from this
kind of getting used over and over again
is that
the cardinality of the natural numbers
this is less than the cardinality
of the power set of the natural numbers
which is less than the cardinality of
the
power set of the power set of the
natural numbers
right i can now take this as a set and
take its power set and i get a new set
with bigger size
which is less than
the power set of the power set where how
many do we have now of the power set of
natural numbers
and so on
okay
so um
and formally this means they're
[Applause]
there's an infinity of infinitudes
there's an infinite an infinite number
of infinite sizes okay
one getting strictly uh in some sense
strictly bigger than the previous size
okay
and
maybe you're wondering
uh there's one more question that's kind
of
sandwiched in between here
pun intended
is
let's look at this first
guy
does there exist
set a
such that
it has size bigger than
natural numbers so it's uncountable but
has size strictly smaller than the power
set of the natural numbers
and this question is called the
continuum hypothesis
hypothesis because it is independent
from one of the
uh standard
axiomatic treatments of set theory
um
but we will not touch this question this
is beyond the scope of this class
but it's an interesting question that's
out there that you know people just
don't know